Kivy tutorial 005: A drawing app
################################

:date: 2019-12-18 22:34
:tags: kivy, python, tutorial
:category: kivy
:slug: kivy_tutorial_005_a_drawing_app
:author: Alexander Taylor

This is number 5 in a `series of introductory Kivy tutorials
<{filename}/pages/kivycrashcourse.rst>`__.

**Central themes:** Canvas instructions

The next couple of tutorials will move to a new application in order
to showcase some more of Kivy's core components. In this tutorial
we'll cover *canvas instructions*, Kivy's low level drawing API which
is always available. In the next two, we'll add touch/mouse
interaction to let you click to draw stuff, and then introduce *kv
language*, and show how it interacts with Python code to easily
produce guis without so much Python boilerplate.

To showcase Kivy's drawing API, our next app will be a simple drawing
application. We'll be making a widget gui to select a few different options
(colour, size etc.), and handling the mouse/touch interaction manually
to draw the result of user input.

We'll need to start with a new basic app template, as introduced in
the first couple of tutorials:

.. code-block:: python

    from kivy.app import App


    class DrawingApp(App):
        def build(self):
            return None

    DrawingApp().run()

Before anything else, let's start by getting some basic drawing
working, with no other gui components. There isn't a Widget for
drawing already (there's no nice way to abstract all the options you
might want), so instead Kivy makes it easy to build your own Widget
class:

.. code-block:: python

    from kivy.uix.widget import Width

    class DrawingWidget(Widget):
        pass

    class DrawingApp(App):
        def build(self):
            return DrawingWidget()

    DrawingApp().run()

You can run the app now, but the screen will just be black because
Widget (and therefore DrawingWidget) doesn't draw anything by default.
We're using Widget as the base class because we want to add it to the
screen, but don't need any extra behaviour beyond that.

Time to do our own drawing. Change your code to add the following:

.. code-block:: python

    from kivy.app import App
    from kivy.uix.boxlayout import BoxLayout
    from kivy.uix.slider import Slider

    from kivy.uix.widget import Widget
    from kivy.graphics import Rectangle, Color

    class DrawingWidget(Widget):
        def __init__(self):
            super(DrawingWidget, self).__init__()

            with self.canvas:
                Color(1, 0, 0, 1)  # arguments are red, green, blue, alpha
                Rectangle(size=(300, 100),
                          pos=(300, 200))


    class DrawingApp(App):

        def build(self):
            root_widget = DrawingWidget()
            return root_widget

    DrawingApp().run()

If you run the app now, you'll see a red rectangle. Its position in
pixels will be 300 right and 200 up from the bottom left of the
screen; Kivy's coordinate system follows OpenGL using the bottom left
as the (0, 0) point.

.. figure:: {filename}/media/kivy_text_tutorials/05_rectangle.png
   :alt: Rectangle in example app
   :align: center
   :width: 400px

This is the basic way of doing any kind of drawing, and with a
combination of canvas instructions (also called graphics instructions)
you can achieve any kind of gui result. In fact, anything you see
drawn with Kivy is ultimately using canvas instructions, including all
the built in widget classes!

To describe what actually happened here: we first opened a ``with
self.canvas`` block. The canvas context manager sets an internal
variable that means all graphics instructions will automatically be
added to the canvas we just opened, in this case the canvas of the
current DrawingWidget. All widgets have a canvas that works the same
way, you can draw on e.g. a Label or BoxLayout if you want. Next we
instantiated our graphics instructions; in this case we use Color
(which sets the colour of any following instructions) and Rectangle
(which draws a rectangle at the given position). Any instructions you
add later will be drawn on top of the previous ones.

Try changing these arguments to modify what you see. The arguments to
Color are red, green, blue and alpha components (currently opaque
red). You can also try drawing other shapes by checking the `vertex
instruction documentation
<https://kivy.org/docs/api-kivy.graphics.vertex_instructions.html>`__
(vertex instructions are shapes, other instructions like Color are
claled `context instructions
<https://kivy.org/docs/api-kivy.graphics.context_instructions.html>`__
and include e.g. translation and rotation).

**Note:** As with several other things mentioned so far, canvas
instructions have their own simple syntax for drawing in kv language,
introduced in `007: Introducing Kivy language
<{filename}/kivy_text_tutorials/007.rst>`__.

**Note:** You can also access ``self.canvas.before`` and
``self.canvas.after``; everything in the former is drawn first, then
everything in ``self.canvas``, then everything in
``self.canvas.after``. These are designed to cover most basic
requirements for layer-based drawing, but you can also introduce
further layers if you want to.

Let's now draw a Rectangle that fills the whole DrawingWidget, to
serve as the background for anything else we draw:

.. code-block:: python

    from kivy.app import App
    from kivy.uix.boxlayout import BoxLayout
    from kivy.uix.slider import Slider

    from kivy.uix.widget import Widget
    from kivy.graphics import Rectangle, Color

    class DrawingWidget(Widget):
        def __init__(self):
            super(DrawingWidget, self).__init__()

            with self.canvas:
                Color(1, 1, 1, 1)
                Rectangle(size=self.size,
                          pos=self.pos)


    class DrawingApp(App):

        def build(self):
            root_widget = DrawingWidget()
            return root_widget

    DrawingApp().run()

Surprise, it doesn't work right! Although we set the rectangle size to
``self.size`` (the size of the DrawingWidget), and its pos to
``self.pos`` (the pos of the DrawingWidget), it always appears in the
bottom left of the window and has size 100 pixels square. This is
because although the DrawingWidget automatically fills the window
(because it is the root widget), its pos and size are not set until
*after* its ``__init__`` method has finished.

**Note:** ``pos`` and ``size`` are two more Kivy properties that all
widgets have. They give the position of the bottom left corner (in
pixels) and the size of the Widget (also in pixels).

To solve this problem, we again use *event bindings*:

.. code-block:: python

    class DrawingWidget(Widget):
        def __init__(self):
            super(DrawingWidget, self).__init__()

            with self.canvas:
                Color(1, 1, 1, 1)
                self.rect = Rectangle(size=self.size,
                                      pos=self.pos)
            self.bind(pos=self.update_rectangle,
                      size=self.update_rectangle)


        def update_rectangle(self, instance, value):
            self.rect.pos = self.pos
            self.rect.size = self.size

This works just like in the previous tutorials; we've bound to the
``pos`` and ``size`` of the widget, and made it so that
whenever they update the Rectangle is also updated. Remember, this is
possible because ``pos`` and ``size`` are Kivy properties,
which you can also bind to (the function is called when their value
changes). When run, your app should now look like the following:

.. figure:: {filename}/media/kivy_text_tutorials/05_output.png
   :alt: Rectangle in example app
   :align: center
   :width: 400px

This tutorial has introduced the basic use of *canvas instructions*,
including the notion of automatically updating them in response to gui
changes, thanks to event binding. This is an important building block
for building complex applications.

In the next tutorial we'll introduce mouse/touch input handling, so
that we can finally draw something dynamicall in response to user
input.

**Next tutorial:** `Let's draw something <{filename}/kivy_text_tutorials/006.rst>`__

Full code
~~~~~~~~~

main.py:

.. code-block:: python

    from kivy.app import App
    from kivy.uix.boxlayout import BoxLayout
    from kivy.uix.slider import Slider

    from kivy.uix.widget import Widget
    from kivy.graphics import Rectangle, Color

    class DrawingWidget(Widget):
        def __init__(self):
            super(DrawingWidget, self).__init__()

            with self.canvas:
                Color(1, 1, 1, 1)
                self.rect = Rectangle(size=self.size,
                                      pos=self.pos)
            self.bind(pos=self.update_rectangle,
                      size=self.update_rectangle)


        def update_rectangle(self, instance, value):
            self.rect.pos = self.pos
            self.rect.size = self.size



    class DrawingApp(App):

        def build(self):
            root_widget = DrawingWidget()
            return root_widget

    DrawingApp().run()
