Kivy 1.9.1 released
###################

:date: 2016-01-02 13:45
:tags: kivy, python, release
:category: kivy
:slug: kivy_1_9_1_released
:author: Alexander Taylor

We've just released a new stable version of Kivy, version 1.9.1. You
can see the changelog on the `mailing list announcement
<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/kivy-users/7LTIHnRCuG4>`__,
and download the new version from the `Kivy website
<http://kivy.org/#download>`__ or via your package manager.

This is mainly a bugfix and tidying release following the major
version 1.9 last year, but includes many bugfixes, smaller new
features, and improvements to our surrounding infrastructure across
almost 1000 new commits from over 70 different contributors.

One major improvement for Windows users is that we now have a fully
working installation method using pip and wheels for both Kivy and its
non-python binary dependencies, rather than our older standalone kivy
distribution. This should make it easy to install Kivy in any existing
Python installation. OS X distribution has also seen improvement, with
better support for working with homebrew.

We've also improved app packaging particularly on OS X, with a new
packaging method that should be easier than pyinstaller (though
pyinstaller is still supported), a buildozer backend for OS X
packaging (now buildozer works with Android, iOS *and* OS X!), and
generally improved and updated `documentation
<http://kivy.org/docs/guide/packaging-osx.html>`__ for the packaging
process. The documentation for Windows and Linux packaging has
similarly been updated, and the new packaging methods and buildozer
support will hopefully be added for these in the future.

Packaging for Android with `python-for-android
<http://python-for-android.readthedocs.org/>`__ is not tied to the
Kivy update schedule in the same way, but has been seeing significant
improvements and updates in the last few months, including a full
revamp of the toolchain and support for many new features, which you
can see in several of the recent previous posts on this blog.

In the future, we're heading towards Kivy 2.0, which we've had in mind
for a while to be a major release with some big new features and
potentially removal of some long-deprecated components. We aren't sure
on the timescale for this yet, but if it takes too long there will be
other minor releases first. For other updates, watch this blog.

Thanks to all our contributors, and enjoy the new release!

