python-for-android 2019.08.09 released: running under Python 2 no longer supported
##################################################################################

:date: 2019-08-20 20:30
:tags: python, android, kivy
:category: kivy
:slug: p4a_2019_08_09_released
:author: Alexander Taylor

`python-for-android <https://github.com/kivy/python-for-android>`__ is
a packaging tool for Python apps on Android. You can create your own
Python distribution including the modules and dependencies you want,
and bundle it in an APK along with your own code.

----------------------------

python-for-android 2019.08.09 has just been released! I haven't been
making a blog post for every release now that we've switched to
monthly releases, but this one includes an especially major change:
python-for-android no longer runs under Python 2. If this affects you,
simply run python-for-android (or buildozer) under Python 3.6 or
newer, they should run exactly the same as ever.

Note that you *can still target Python 2* on Android, simply add
python2 to your requirements as you would normally. However, this
won't last forever, support for Python 2 will probably be totally
removed early in 2020.

Other changes in this release include further testing improvements,
significantly improved documentation on developing with
python-for-android, and some preparations for further big changes in
the future. See the `release note
<https://github.com/kivy/python-for-android/releases/tag/v2019.08.09>`__
for full details.
