Vivarium 0.0.2 release: improved config handling, cli help, better CI and unit tests
####################################################################################

:date: 2021-04-17 18:00
:tags: vivarium, wayland
:category: wayland
:slug: vivarium_wayland_compositor_0_0_2_release
:author: Alexander Taylor

I've just tagged for release `Vivarium 0.0.2 <https://github.com/inclement/vivarium>`__. This is an incremental release with many small fixes following the `first release announcement <{filename}/20210226-vivarium.rst>`__. Many thanks to those who tested it out and reported issues.

Vivarium is a dynamic tiling wayland compositor, with desktop semantics inspired mostly by xmonad.

Release summary
===============

Key improvements in this release include:

* Improved CI to actually run Vivarium with different config types, catching issues with default values on different systems.
* Added cli argument parsing and initial cli interface, the Vivarium binary can now output a list of available layouts and action commands for keybinds instead of having to read the code to find them.
* Added unit tests for layout function and config loading.
* Improved XWayland popup window detection (i.e. windows that should be made floating automatically) by properly inspecting X window properties.
* Improved default config values in general and fixed issues with config loading crashing on certain missing data.
* Various minor bugfixes.

Next goals
==========

This release has been tagged partly because I'm working to merge damage tracking. This is a key feature that will dramatically improve performance but it has the potential to introduce tricky bugs, so this release serves as a clear stable target. I hope to merge damage tracking for the next release.

Our backend library `Wlroots <https://github.com/swaywm/wlroots>`__ recently tagged the new version 0.13 and Vivarium needs a little tweaking to support it. I expect to bundle this into the next release.
