
python-for-android 0.6 released
###############################

:date: 2017-11-27 23:00
:tags: python, android, kivy
:category: kivy
:slug: python_for_android_0_6_0_released
:author: Alexander Taylor
         
We've just officially released `python-for-android 0.6
<https://github.com/kivy/python-for-android>`__. The new version can
be downloaded via pip, or will be used by buildozer automatically in
new installations.  This release contains about 130 new commits from
14 different contributors. Thanks to everyone involved!

`python-for-android
<http://python-for-android.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ is a
packaging tool for turning Python scripts and apps into Android
APKs. It was originally created for use with the `Kivy graphical
framework <https://kivy.org/#home>`__, but now supports multiple kinds
of Python app including Kivy, PySDL2, a webview interface with Flask
or other webserver backend, plain Python scripts without a GUI, or other
possibilities such as Python builds for use in other applications.

As planned following the release of python-for-android 0.5, the new
version includes some relatively major changes and improvements. In
particular, python-for-android should now work with all recent
versions of the Android SDK and NDK. On the SDK side this means
python-for-android now uses gradle if available, although this doesn't
require any changes to the configuration on the user side.

For the next release I intend to focus work on checking and updating
python-for-android's build recipes to make sure they are all properly
compatible with one another and with different build
configurations. I'd also like to improve our automated testing, in
order to more easily detect and fix issues as they appear.

For full instructions and further information, see the
`python-for-android documentation
<https://python-for-android.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__.
